Add docs of package Pulsar Functions (#7904)
apache/pulsar: site2/docs/functions-package.md

---
id: functions-package
title: Package Pulsar Functions
sidebar_label: "How-to: Package"
---

This section provides step-by-step instructions to package Pulsar functions in Java, Python, and Go. 

> **Tip**
>
> - Packaging a window function in Java is the same as [packaging a function in Java](#java) as below. 
>
> - Currently, the window function is not available in Python and Go.

> # Prerequisite

Reviewer: Pulsar docs start with heading 2.

> Before running a Pulsar function, you need to start up Pulsar.

Reviewer: start  up --> start
Check all similar cases in this md file.

### Run a standalone Pulsar in Docker

This example uses Docker to run a standalone Pulsar.

```bash
docker run -it \
    -p 6650:6650 \
    -p 8080:8080 \
    -v $PWD/data:/pulsar/data \
    apachepulsar/pulsar:latest \
    bin/pulsar standalone
```

> **Tip**
>
> - `$PWD/data` is the local directory. `-v` maps the `/pulsar/data` directory in the Docker image to the local `$PWD/data` directory.
>

> > - To check whether the image starts up, use the command `docker ps`.

Reviewer: what does "the image starts up"?

> > - To check whether the image starts up or not, use the command `docker ps`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> - To check whether the image starts up, use the command `docker ps`.
```

### Run Pulsar cluster in k8s

> For details about how to deploy a Pulsar cluster in the k8s environment, For details, see [here](helm-overview.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For details about how to deploy a Pulsar cluster in the k8s environment, see [here](helm-overview.md).
```

> For how to deploy Pulsar cluster in the k8s environment, please refer to [here](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/helm-overview/).

Reviewer: remove "please".
For details, refer to https://developers.google.com/style/tone#politeness-and-use-of-please

> For how to deploy Pulsar cluster in the k8s environment, For details, refer to [here](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/helm-overview/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For details about how to deploy a Pulsar cluster in the k8s environment, see [here](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/helm-overview/).
```

> For details about how to deploy a Pulsar cluster in the k8s environment, For details, see [here](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/helm-overview/).

Reviewer: use relative path for links, update it as (helm-overview.md)

## Java 

This example demonstrates how to package a function in Java.

> **Note**
>

> > This example assumes that you have [run a standalone Pulsar in Docker](#run-a-standalone-pulsar-in-docker) successfully.

Reviewer: Since we have Prerequisite, we can just remove the note in each Function.

> > This example assumes that you have [run a standalone Pulsar in Docker](#Run Pulsar cluster in Docker) successfully.

Reviewer: the link is not correct.

Reviewer: 1. run a standalone Pulsar in Docker or run Pulsar cluster in Docker?
2. How about run Pulsar in K8s? Do the following steps work for K8s?

    >       return null;
    >   }
    > }
    > ```

3. Package the Java function.

    ```bash
    mvn package
    ```

    After the Java function is packaged, a `target` directory is automatically created. Open the `target` directory to see if there is a jar package similar to `java-function-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar`.

4.  Run the Java function.

     (1) Copy the packaged jar file to the Pulsar image.

    ```bash
    docker exec -it [CONTAINER ID] /bin/bash
    docker cp <path of java-function-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar>  CONTAINER ID:/pulsar
    ```

    (2) Run the Java function using the following command.

    ```bash
    ./bin/pulsar-admin functions localrun \
    --classname org.example.test.ExclamationFunction \
    --jar java-function-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar \
    --inputs persistent://public/default/my-topic-1 \
    --output persistent://public/default/test-1 \
    --tenant public \
    --namespace default \
    --name JavaFunction
    ```

    The following log indicates that the Java function starts up successfully.

    ```text
    ...
    07:55:03.724 [main] INFO  org.apache.pulsar.functions.runtime.ProcessRuntime - Started process successfully
    ...
    ```

    > **Tip**
    >

>     >  - For the descriptions about the parameters (for example, `--classname`, `--jar`, `--inputs`, and so on), run the command `./bin/pulsar-admin functions` to get more information or see [here](http://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/pulsar-admin/#functions).

Reviewer: descriptions --> description

>     >  - For the description about the parameters (for example, `--classname`, `--jar`, `--inputs`, and so on), run the command `./bin/pulsar-admin functions` to get more information or see [here](http://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/pulsar-admin/#functions).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    >  - For the description about the parameters (for example, `--classname`, `--jar`, `--inputs`, and so on), run the command `./bin/pulsar-admin functions` or see [here](http://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/pulsar-admin/#functions).
```

    > 
    > - If you want to start a function in cluster mode, replace `localrun` with `create` in the command above. The following log indicates that the Java function starts successfully.
    >
    >   ```text
    >   "Created successfully"

>     >   ```

Reviewer: I see the same tip occurs several times in this doc, if it's important information, you can add it in the body. If you prefer tips, I suggest that we can keep one.
For guides on "Tip/Note", refer to https://developers.google.com/style/notices

## Python 

> Python Function supports the following three forms:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Python Function supports the following three formats:
```

Reviewer 2: I am not sure, the author please decide which is better.

- One python file
- ZIP file
- PIP

## One python file

This example demonstrates how to package a function by **one python file** in Python.

> **Note**
>

> > This example assumes that you have [run a standalone Pulsar in Docker](#Run Pulsar cluster in Docker) successfully.

Reviewer: same questions with the above note.

> > This example assumes that you have [run a standalone Pulsar in Docker](#Run a standalone Pulsar in Docker) successfully.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> This example assumes that you are [running a standalone Pulsar in Docker](#Run a standalone Pulsar in Docker) successfully.
```

Reviewer 2: The author please decide which is better.

2. Install a Python client.

    The implementation of a Python function depends on the Python client, so before deploying a Python function, you need to install the corresponding version of the Python client. 

    ```bash
    pip install python-client==2.6.0
    ```

3. Run the Python Function.

    (1) Copy the Python function file to the Pulsar image.

    ```bash
    docker exec -it [CONTAINER ID] /bin/bash
    docker cp <path of Python function file>  CONTAINER ID:/pulsar
    ```

    (2) Run the Python function using the following command.

    ```bash
    ./bin/pulsar-admin functions localrun \
    --classname org.example.test.ExclamationFunction \
    --py <path of Python Function file> \
    --inputs persistent://public/default/my-topic-1 \
    --output persistent://public/default/test-1 \
    --tenant public \
    --namespace default \
    --name PythonFunction
    ```

    The following log indicates that the Python function starts up successfully.

    ```text
    ...
    07:55:03.724 [main] INFO  org.apache.pulsar.functions.runtime.ProcessRuntime - Started process successfully
    ...
    ```

    > **Tip**
    >

>     >  - For the description about the parameters (for example, `--classname`, `--py`, `--inputs`, and so on), run the command `./bin/pulsar-admin functions` to get more information or see [here](http://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/pulsar-admin/#functions).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    >  - For the description about the parameters (for example, `--classname`, `--py`, `--inputs`, and so on), run the command `./bin/pulsar-admin functions` or see [here](http://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/pulsar-admin/#functions).
```

    > 
    > - If you want to start a function in cluster mode, replace `localrun` with `create` in the command above. The following log indicates that the Python function starts up successfully.
    >
    >   ```text
    >   "Created successfully"
    >   ```

## ZIP file

This example demonstrates how to package a function by **ZIP file** in Python.

> **Note**
>

> > This example assumes that you have [run a standalone Pulsar in Docker](#Run Pulsar cluster in Docker) successfully.

Reviewer: the link is not correct, check all similar cases.

> > This example assumes that you have [run a standalone Pulsar in Docker](#Run a standalone Pulsar in Docker) successfully.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> This example assumes that you are [running a standalone Pulsar in Docker](#Run a standalone Pulsar in Docker) successfully.
```

Reviewer 2: The author please decide which is better.

1. Prepare the ZIP file

When packaging the ZIP file of the Python Function, the following requirements need to be met:

```text

> Assuming zip file with format `func.zip`, extract to folder function and internal dir format:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assuming the zip file is named as `func.zip`, you need to extract to folder function and internal dir format:
```

Reviewer 2: I do not quite understand the second half sentence...

    "func/src"
    "func/requirements.txt"
    "func/deps"
```

> Now we take [exclamation.zip](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/tree/master/tests/docker-images/latest-version-image/python-examples) as an example, its internal structure is as follows:

Reviewer 2: The author can choose either or keep it as it is now.

```text
.
├── deps
│   └── sh-1.12.14-py2.py3-none-any.whl
└── src
    └── exclamation.py
```

2. Run the Python Function

    (1) Copy the ZIP file to the Pulsar image.

    ```bash
    docker exec -it [CONTAINER ID] /bin/bash
    docker cp <path of ZIP file>  CONTAINER ID:/pulsar
    ```

    (2) Run the Python function using the following command.

    ```bash
    ./bin/pulsar-admin functions localrun \
    --classname exclamation \
    --py <path of ZIP file> \
    --inputs persistent://public/default/in-topic \
    --output persistent://public/default/out-topic \
    --tenant public \
    --namespace default \
    --name PythonFunction
    ```

    The following log indicates that the Python function starts up successfully.

    ```text
    ...
    07:55:03.724 [main] INFO  org.apache.pulsar.functions.runtime.ProcessRuntime - Started process successfully
    ...
    ```

    > **Tip**
    >

>     >  - For the description about the parameters (for example, `--classname`, `--py`, `--inputs`, and so on), run the command `./bin/pulsar-admin functions` to get more information or see [here](http://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/pulsar-admin/#functions).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    >  - For the description about the parameters (for example, `--classname`, `--py`, `--inputs`, and so on), run the command `./bin/pulsar-admin functions` or see [here](http://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/pulsar-admin/#functions).
```

    > 
    > - If you want to start a function in cluster mode, replace `localrun` with `create` in the command above. The following log indicates that the Python function starts up successfully.
    >
    >   ```text
    >   "Created successfully"
    >   ```

### PIP

This example demonstrates how to package a function by **PIP** in Python.

> > **Note**

Reviewer 2: If you have more than one information under a note, please use unordered list. If the unordered list is not used, please make sure there are two spaces at the end of a line, so the next line is a new line.

>
> The PIP method is only supported in the runtime of kubernetes.

> > This example assumes that you have [run a Pulsar cluster in k8s](#Run Pulsar cluster in k8s) successfully.

Reviewer 2: Same as above.

1. Config `functions_worker.yml`:

```text
#### Kubernetes Runtime ####
installUserCodeDependencies: true
```

2. Write your Python Function

```
from pulsar import Function
import js2xml

# The classic ExclamationFunction that appends an exclamation at the end
# of the input
class ExclamationFunction(Function):
  def __init__(self):
    pass

  def process(self, input, context):
    // add your logic
    return input + '!'
```

> Here we can introduce additional dependencies. When Python Function detects that the file currently used is `whl` and the `installUserCodeDependencies` parameter is specified, the system will execute `pip install` to install the dependencies required in Python Function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we can introduce additional dependencies. When Python Function detects that the file currently used is `whl` and the `installUserCodeDependencies` parameter is specified, the system use the `pip install` command to install the dependencies required in Python Function.
```

3. Generate the `whl` file

```shell script
$ cd $PULSAR_HOME/pulsar-functions/scripts/python
$ chmod +x generate.sh
$ ./generate.sh <path of your Python Function> <path of the whl output dir> <the version of whl>
# e.g: ./generate.sh /path/to/python /path/to/python/output 1.0.0
```

Output in `/path/to/python/output`:

```text
-rw-r--r--  1 root  staff   1.8K  8 27 14:29 pulsarfunction-1.0.0-py2-none-any.whl
-rw-r--r--  1 root  staff   1.4K  8 27 14:29 pulsarfunction-1.0.0.tar.gz
-rw-r--r--  1 root  staff     0B  8 27 14:29 pulsarfunction.whl
```

## Go 

This example demonstrates how to package a function in Go.

> **Note**
>

> > This example assumes that you have [run a standalone Pulsar in Docker](#Run a standalone Pulsar in Docker) successfully.

Reviewer 2: Same as above.

1. Write a Go function.

    Currently, Go function can be **only** implemented using SDK and the interface of the function is exposed in the form of SDK. Before using the Go function, you need to import "github.com/apache/pulsar/pulsar-function-go/pf". 

    ```
    import (
        "context"
        "fmt"

        "github.com/apache/pulsar/pulsar-function-go/pf"
    )

    func HandleRequest(ctx context.Context, input []byte) error {
        fmt.Println(string(input) + "!")
        return nil
    }

    func main() {
        pf.Start(HandleRequest)
    }
    ```

    > **Tip**
    > 
    > You can use context to connect with the Go function.
    >
    > ```
    > if fc, ok := pf.FromContext(ctx); ok {
    >    fmt.Printf("function ID is:%s, ", fc.GetFuncID())
    >    fmt.Printf("function version is:%s\n", fc.GetFuncVersion())
    > }
    > ```

    > **Note**
    >
    > - In `main()`, you **only** need to register the function name to `Start()`. **Only** one function name can be received in `Start()`. 
    >

>     > - Go function uses Go reflection based on the received function name to verify whether the parameter list and returned value list implemented are correct. The parameter list and returned value list specified **must be** one of the following sample functions:

Reviewer 2: `returned value list implemented` is a bit confusing.

    >   func (input) error
    >   func () (output, error)
    >   func (input) (output, error)
    >   func (context.Context) error
    >   func (context.Context, input) error
    >   func (context.Context) (output, error)
    >   func (context.Context, input) (output, error)
    >   ```

2. Build the Go function.

    ```
    go build <your Go Function filename>.go 
    ```

3. Run the Go Function.

    (1) Copy the Go function file to the Pulsar image.

    ```bash
    docker exec -it [CONTAINER ID] /bin/bash
    docker cp <your go function path>  CONTAINER ID:/pulsar
    ```

    (2) Run the Go function with the following command.

    ```
    ./bin/pulsar-admin functions localrun \
        --go [your go function path] 
        --inputs [input topics] \
        --output [output topic] \
        --tenant [default:public] \
        --namespace [default:default] \
        --name [custom unique go function name] 
    ```

    The following log indicates that the Go function starts up successfully.

    ```text
    ...
    07:55:03.724 [main] INFO  org.apache.pulsar.functions.runtime.ProcessRuntime - Started process successfully
    ...
    ```

    > **Tip**
    >

>     >  - For the description about the parameters (for example, `--classname`, `--go`, `--inputs`, and so on), run the command `./bin/pulsar-admin functions` to get more information or see [here](http://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/pulsar-admin/#functions).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    >  - For the description about the parameters (for example, `--classname`, `--go`, `--inputs`, and so on), run the command `./bin/pulsar-admin functions` or see [here](http://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/pulsar-admin/#functions).
```

>
> - To check whether the image starts up or not, use the command `docker ps`.

### Run Pulsar cluster in k8s

For how to deploy Pulsar cluster in the k8s environment, For details, refer to [here](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/helm-overview/).

## Java 

This example demonstrates how to package a function in Java.

> **Note**
>

> > This example assumes that you have [run a standalone Pulsar in Docker](#Run a standalone Pulsar in Docker) successfully.

Reviewer: [run a standalone Pulsar in Docker](#run-a-standalone-pulsar-in-docker)

Reviewer: The link is not correct, you can build locally to check whether it works.

Reviewer: you can use "(#run-a-standalone-pulsar-in-docker)" for the link.
